 Cambridge Chronicle and Journal - Saturday 23 February 1878 p. 4-5

Mr. W. Morris addressed the meeting as follows:-

In these days, when even those of us who love art most are apt sometimes to be
discouraged by the carelessness for art that surrounds us, it is not wonderful
that people should ask, some in triumph and some in sorrow, is the desire for
beauty, and eventfulness of form that produces art, an essential part of man's
nature? or is it only one of the fleeting outcomes of the necessary energy of
life, like many another fashion that has now passed away for ever? That is an
anxious question for you and me, whose livesare being spent now in dealing
with that art. For indeed, I conceive that, to put it in another way, it
means, are we merely trifling over the cast-off hobbies of former ages, and
weakly trying to spin out the time a little before all these toys are looked
upon with clear eyes and proced at their proper value; or are we working
diligently, looking backward with gratitude and forward with hope, expecting
while we toil to see some glimmer of the new light beginning to shine upon
neglected art, on the creative powers of man, that as in the latter days shone
so fully on science, on man's analytical powers. I say it is a most serious
question to us, whether are has become a mere rag of past history or is still
a living fibre of our present days. For if we must say yes to the first part
of the question, then we artists are wasting our time, or worse; we by our
trifling are helping to make the age effeminate and trifling and we had better
at once make an end of what we call art and hope to see some new thing take
the place of it. And now I must say that the very fact that such a question
can be put by any one that loves the Art, is a sign that some great change is
a t work in these matters. Who could have thought of such a thing once except
a few devotees or grumbling philosophers, with whose contempt of Art, indeed,
I imagine there was mingled not a little affectation. The most of men worked
on, letting their hands follow the instinct of their brains, and producing
abundant beauty either simple even to childishness, or sublime and mighty,
according to the measure of the mind that guided their hands. There has been
accomplished all that great body of Art that we in these latter days have the
pleasure and advantage of studying, if we have no other pleasure and
advantage, it rose from mere barbarism, how or where we know not: it changed,
it wavered, grew faint, rose up again, lost on one side, gained on the other,
fitted itself to all races all creeds, and th[r]ough everything was still the
same Art, with one unbroken though varying life. Where is this art now? Where
is the life of so many thousand years? Has it died out? And if so, can the
dead live again? Indeed, in appearance, I should say it has died; or rather,
we must at least say that the link that binds the imitative conscious art of
today with that progressive unconscious art of the past is hard to find, if
indeed it can be found at all. Yet somehow we artists must find it if we are
not to call ourselves triflers over effete rubbish, even as I said before. If
you are astonished at my taking what must at first seem such a gloomy view of
art, I can only say many people, I know, think or rather feel that that link
is clean lost. I am forced to say that beyond a very small circle now-a-days,
I find people living in a world that does not know art at all. For the most
part even highly cultivated people eager for the good of the world with all
kinds of sensitiveness, nevertheless are utterly blind on this side of things.
True,they may think it necessary or rather desirable that something should be
known of art as a matter of education, but they would not miss it if it were
to disappear; they do not really care about it at all; they will live amidst
the most frightful ugliness quite blandly and happily: though some of them, at
least, make a profession of loving the country, the mountains, the sea, and so
on, all the things that inspire art in those that produce it. I say "make a
profession to do so," since I rather more than suspect they are not a little
blunt to these impressions also. This, I am sure, can never have been the case
in those past times I have been talking of, and it isa puzzle to me, how it
can be now. A puzzle to me in one way: yet in another way I must acknowledge
the justice of it, yes and rejoice in it even. I say I must rejoice in it when
I think of the mass of squalor and misery, the unhelped and apparently
unhelpable hidesousness, which surrounds the greater part of our big towns. I
should doubt the existence of any possible justice in the world if while 999
thousandths of the people, say, of London, are living in such a state that it
is impossible for them to have any idea of beauty at all, the thousandth part
were not oppressed by the mere brutality, unconsciously if they did not share
it, as they verily do. For I declare to you that though in this as in all else
the rich have the advantage over the poor, the advantage in matters of tast,
in appreciation of and longing for beauty, I would rather say, is but small.
Glitter show and vulgarity are copiously paid for by the rich. Into such
strange byways of folly has civilization strayed at whiles. I must ask you not
to think that I am wandering from the point, for let us consider. These
unconscious artists of past days were thinking of something more than art when
they wrought wonders that we rejoice in. They were earning their bread, they
were glorifying their creeds, they were struggling with difficult and
intricate prices [?] of knowledge while they wrought them. Their life was in
those works of art and showed them in their ways of life. But with us the life
of our great cities, the places, you understand, in which the arts must always
mostly flourish, is so distasteful and disgusting to every man - I will not say
of taste, but of heart rather,- that we who work in the arts cannot by any
means help striving to escape from all that into some unreal world, in which
nothing but art exists; and the result is that all we do is weak, isolated,
wanting in abundance and spontaneity. Now I do not stand before you as a mere
praiser of past time. I also know the injustice, the ignorance, the violence,
and unreasoning passion of those past ages. I know what the world has won
since then. But I ask what it seems to have lost. Has it lost it past
recovery?
